Create KEP for built-in Defaulting (#1928)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/1929-built-in-default/README.md

serializing/deserializing and allocating memory by using reflection. We
also have mechanisms in place to parse, process and use the OpenAPI.

In other words, the plan would be the following:
1. Update kube-openapi to parse the `+default` marker and include it in
the OpenAPI definition
2. Add additional "default" field to sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff
internal schema, and parse that field from the OpenAPI.
3. Create a new "AddDefault" method in sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff
that receives a Value (value is an interface that can be backed by a
reflection based Go-type, associated with the corresponding
OpenAPI). That method would add the defaults in-place.
4. Add and wire things so that this function can be called prior to
running the existing defaulting code.

### Marker format

The marker will have the following format:
```
// +default=<any>
```
which describes the value that the server will use if the field has a
zero-value.

`<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),
representing the actual value to use by default. That is different from
the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus

> that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Reviewer: Namely: YAML preserves the concise semantics that you want for most values:

```
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

  // +default=bar
  String string

  // +default=[popcorn, chips]
  StringList []string
}
```

while still allowing more complex expressions:

```
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}]
```

Forcing the "one-line" subset allows us to sidestep a lot of the YAML weirdness in syntax, but we can still just use a YAML parser to parse the expressions if we want

Author: I just copied your great comment directly in there, thanks!

the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus
that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Namely, this will allow to preserve the concise semantics that you want
for most values:

```golang
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

  // +default=bar
  String string

  // +default=[popcorn, chips]
  StringList []string
}
```
while still allowing more complex expressions:
```
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}]
```

Forcing the "one-line" subset allows us to sidestep a lot of the YAML
weirdness in syntax, but we can still just use a YAML parser to parse
the expressions if we want.

# CRD Normalization

In order to have a consistent behavior between CRDs and built-in, the
following two things need to happen:
1. Using the flag with CRDs requires the present of a
`x-kubernetes-remove-nulls` flag (automatically set when using defaults
in built-in types). When present, the apiserver will remove all null
values from CRDs before defaulting, after validation, on all updates.
2. Non-pointer structs will, in both kubebuilder and for built-in types,
disallow the use of `+default` and force a value of `{}`, since this is

> automatically done by Go deserialization.

Author: @thockin @DirectXMan12 This is a much simpler version of the normalization solution that I was looking for. I'll try to add additional examples here, as discussed with Solly, to show that this makes sense.

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Currently, built-in API types are written as Go structures annotated
with markers to add additional semantics. This method has inspired
controller-tools who has re-used and improved on that technique for
building CRDs. We're proposing using the `// +default` marker to
declaratively define defaults (and have kubebuilder use that as well)
since that mechanism still doesn't exist for built-in. This proposal
tries to solve that gap.

## Motivation

Having a new `// +default` marker for built-in types has several
important benefits:

- It's more convenient for types authors.
- The types and their behaviors are easier to understand since they are
described together.
- They are less error-prone, and prevent people from using anti-patterns
like "cross-field dependency defaults" (default depends on another
field), non-deterministic or complicated defaults. These patterns
might be useful in limited circumstances, but it should be easier to do
the right thing in most cases.
- Removes the inconsistency with CRDs that already support this
mechanism.

> - Solves bug where associative keys need to either be required or

Reviewer 2: not sure how this solves it.

Reviewer 3: xref https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/structured-merge-diff/issues/130, [WG API Expression Work Items: Defaulted associative keys are missing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vXqKm_K__ySl1iRxnbdZM5DM6i5iqYF3lduTf9jE0mY/edit#bookmark=id.748a9grfzn0c)

By knowing what the default value for a key field is, server side apply can fill it is if is absent in a apply manifest.

  defaulted.

### Goals

The goal is to add a new `// +default` tag to our current built-in Go

> IDL. That tag will be transformed into the OpenAPI `default` tag and

Reviewer 2: s/tag/field/ for the OpenAPI one

then routed to defaulting functions so that defaulting can be done

> declaratively.

Reviewer 2: does this change anything about CRDs or is this only about native types?

> declaratively.

Author: Yeah, I've described that in the motivation section right before, should I move it/duplicate it?

### Non-Goals

While this proposal is probably paving the way for additional OpenAPI
based validation, validation is entirely out-of-scope for this project.

This proposal also doesn't intend to remove the existing defaulting
mechanism since some defaulting still requires non-static values that
need to be computed and can't be defined declaratively. We could replace
some defaulting that doesn't require to be done as code though.

## Proposal

Since the goal of this proposal is to increase consistency with the CRD
defaulting, we propose to use the same mechanism (both in OpenAPI and

> similar to what kubebuilder does). This defaulting will happen BEFORE

Reviewer 2: what is "the same mechanism"? cannot follow.

the existing defaulting functions are called (existing functions can be
updated to panic so that we can see if defaults are properly applied).

One very important nuance with CRDs is that CRDs are deserialized in
unstructured objects that can distinguish between specified and
unspecified fields. That is not the case for built-in types that are
directly deserialized into Go-struct, where the unspecified fields are

> zero-valued. It's important to understand that only zero-value

Reviewer 2: Does this mean you want to use reflection? Or do you want to convert to unstructured?

> omit-empty fields will be defaulted using that mechanism.

Reviewer 2: sounds like a consequence of something. But you state this here as a proposal. Needs different wording to make that clear.

Computed defaults will not be supported as a declarative marker and will
continue being supported through the existing defaulting functions.

### Risks and Mitigations

The main risk is that we could end-up with different defaults for

> existing types which would be extremely confusing for our users.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean that semantics might change? What are the mitigations?

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 2: **I am not convinced about the complexity-benefit ratio of this approach.** I like the idea to support `// +default`. But it would be much much easier probably to just generate defaulter funcs and use the mechanisms we have unchanged. Wiring server side apply into our serialization stack is huge. Getting defaulting semantics right (i.e. without difference to what we have for native types and for CRDs today) is hard.

@liggitt @lavalamp am I alone with this gut feeling, especially about the complexity-benefit ratio of wiring this up in our (de)serialization stack?

Author: I think I've addressed that comment. I agree with you and just had forgotten to update some sections of the document.

I'm planning on generating defaulting functions and keep the current mechanisms unchanged, this is just an additional layer.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

There are multiple challenges to running defaults declaratively and
changing the current mechanisms:

- We don't use OpenAPI to drive validation nor defaulting
currently. There is no routing of the OpenAPI to most operations in

> kubernetes (the only thing right now is server-side apply).

Reviewer 2: s/most operations/most steps in the request pipeline, here namely deserialization/

- OpenAPI fields don't strictly map to Go types fields

> (e.g. capitalization, embedding)

Reviewer 2: what does this mean? Coming back to my question about reflection. I don't feel week with introducing a reflection based mechanism. We just spent tons of time to remove reflection based conversion from the stack. We probably want to avoid to add a new step in our pipeline.

Reviewer 2: nvmd. You come to that below.

In general, it is much easier to follow if you clearly propose first what you want to do and then afterwards discuss it.

- Reflection can't access comments, only structTags (which is why we have
both structTags AND comments for SMP, but that's ugly and suboptimal).

One possible way to address that second point is to serialize the object
back to json, apply the default, and re-deserialize back into a
go-struct, but that's memory intensive and Kubernetes doesn't need that.

We're proposing to use the same mechanisms that we've put in place for
server-side apply, implemented in
"sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff". We currently have a way for
server-side apply to convert Go types into "json"-like values without
serializing/deserializing and allocating memory by using reflection. We

> also have mechanisms in place to parse, process and use the OpenAPI.

Reviewer 2: what is the overhead of this? Will it be done another time just for defaulting? Note that this also has to go into the storage stack that also applies defaults.

In other words, the plan would be the following:
1. Update kube-openapi to parse the `+default` marker and include it in
the OpenAPI definition
2. Add additional "default" field to sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff
internal schema, and parse that field from the OpenAPI.
3. Create a new "AddDefault" method in sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff
that receives a Value (value is an interface that can be backed by a
reflection based Go-type, associated with the corresponding
OpenAPI). That method would add the defaults in-place.
4. Add and wire things so that this function can be called prior to

> running the existing defaulting code.

Reviewer 2: this plan reads like a lot of hand waving. It needs much more details. I fear that challenges are lurking just in the way things are plumbed today. Probably without a rough prototype nobody can judge the real complexity.

### Marker format

The marker will have the following format:
```
// +default=<any>
```
which describes the value that the server will use if the field has a
zero-value.

> `<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),

Author: cc @DirectXMan12 

I clearly agree with "less ambiguous", not with "simpler":
```
// YAML:
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}] 
// JSON:
// +default=[{"port": 80, "name": "http"}]
```

Or even a simpler example:
```
// YAML:
// +default=TCP
// JSON:
// +default="TCP"
```

Of course the confusion comes from:
```
// YAML:
// +default=yes
// JSON:
// +default="yes" or true?
```

> `<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),

Reviewer 4: For an API spec, I think we should prefer clarity. The value of the following are all ambiguous

```
// +default=
// +default=0
// +default=yes
```

> `<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),

Author: After discussion, we believe it's fine to use json, I'm updating the text.

representing the actual value to use by default. That is different from
the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus
that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Namely, this will allow to preserve the concise semantics that you want
for most values:

```golang
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

  // +default=bar
  String string

  // +default=[popcorn, chips]
  StringList []string
}
```
while still allowing more complex expressions:
```
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}]
```

Forcing the "one-line" subset allows us to sidestep a lot of the YAML
weirdness in syntax, but we can still just use a YAML parser to parse
the expressions if we want.

> ### CRD Normalization

Reviewer 2: this needs to be much more prominent in this KEP, not as an afterthought in the implementation section.

Author: Agreed, thanks

Reviewer 2: yes, in my words: we have to move CRDs to a sane semantics (where "sane" is defined by what Golang unmarshalling and zero type comparison gives us for native types). Then we can identify both default mechanisms.

In order to have a consistent behavior between CRDs and built-in, the
following two things need to happen:

1. Using the flag with CRDs requires the presence of a

> `x-kubernetes-remove-nulls` flag set to true at the root level of the

Reviewer 2: and false is forbidden? Why only on root levels? Note that we can have types like PodSpec embedded into some CRD.

object (automatically set when using defaults in built-in types). When
present, the apiserver will remove all null values from CRDs before

> defaulting, after validation, on all updates (including patches, after

Reviewer 2: why after validation?

Author: Because otherwise it means that you can send null to fields that are not nullable.

Author: PS: Especially as an update, a patch should be able to contain null, but that works as expected.

the patch is applied).

2. Non-pointer structs will, in both kubebuilder and for built-in types,
disallow the use of `+default` and force a value of `{}`, since this is

> automatically done by Go deserialization:

Reviewer 2: this seems to contradict eachother: disallow default, but force {}. What of the two?

Reviewer 2: What about non-omit-empty int, floats, strings?

Reviewer 2: The whole paragraph needs discussion why we do this and what is the effect. I guess it is this `omitempty` behaviour that is broken for non-pointer structs.

Reviewer 2: Be clear here that this only about schema generation. It says nothing about allowed openapi schemas in CRDs.

Author: Yes, good points

```golang
Type Root struct {
  // Defaults on non-pointer structs are FORBIDDEN:
  // +default={name: entry, number: 12}
  Entry SubLevel
}

Type SubLevel struct {
  Name string
  Number int
}
```

### Examples

#### Non-pointer structs

Given the following type, defined either in Kubebuilder or as a built-in type:
```golang
type Root struct {
  Entry SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      $ref: SubLevel
      default: {}
SubLevel:
  type: object
  properties:
    name:
      type: string
      default: default-name
    number:
      type: integer
      default: 0

> ```

Reviewer 2: nit: no $ref for CRDs.

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

#### Struct pointers

Struct pointers can be have a specific default since they are distinct
from unspecified non-pointers structs. Modifying the type from the
previous example:
```golang
type Root struct {
  // This is now a pointer, we can provide a default:
  // +default={name: pointer-name}
  Entry *SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this a good example? Shouldn't we forbid it? I would expect that the field defaults in the top-level default value match those in the fields. We could even go one step further and disallow non-`{}` defaults for structs.

Reviewer 3: +1 to avoid any way of having two different default values for the same field via the +default mechanism. That opens us up to having to define and document rules for which value gets applied when.

Author: It's a good example because it shows how things work distinctively.

There is an interesting distinction between: "this is the default item" and "this is the default value for the field", e.g.
```yaml
port:
  default: {number: 53, protocol: UDP}
  properties:
    number:
      type: integer
      # no default
    protocol:
      type: string
      default: TCP
```
This could also apply to a list by the way where the 1 defaulted item would have a UDP port opened and the protocol would still default to TCP.

Reviewer 5: I do like a CRD authors ability to override a default with their preferred default... I am also concerned with the confusion and challenges mentioned by jpbetz

Author: I think the feature is useful and important, we should let people build what is useful for them. We can maybe avoid the foot-gun by either:
- Have a warning when a default is specified on a non-pointer struct,
- Be smarter and have a warning when that default doesn't match defaults in nested fields

Reviewer 2: > I do like a CRD authors ability to override a default with their preferred default... 

I don't think this is the purpose of this. For your usecase kubebuilder better has a way to override. In our API repo https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/0000_20_kube-apiserver-operator_01_config.crd.yaml-patch we allow to patch whatever kubebuilder derives from types. I would love to see this implemented by kubebuilder natively, something like:
```
// +kubebuilder:schema-override:containers[].name={pattern: ...}
```
In other words, overrides do not need support in the CRD schema API, but only in tooling, here in controller-gen.

Reviewer 4: Limiting the defaults of complex types (objects and arrays) to single-level values (`{}` and `[]`) would make generating the defaulting functions significantly easier.

Author: Yeah, I'm really not convinced that it will change the complexity of the code, and I can already see use-cases where this makes sense, I'm sure users will find others.

Author: I think we agree that this is a good behavior.

and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      $ref: SubLevel
      default: {name: pointer-name}
SubLevel:
  type: object
  properties:
    name:
      type: string
      default: default-name
    number:
      type: integer
      default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

### Test Plan

As soon as this is implemented and working, we can start removing a lot
of the existing defaulting code and replace it with this values, and we
can re-use the existing defaulting tests, make sure that the behavior
doesn't change when moving from code-based defaults to declarative
default. Also panic in specific places of the defaulters to guarantee

> that the defaulting have happened before.

Reviewer 2: I doubt the existing defaulting tests have an adequat test coverage, especially around the subtle differences around null, unspecified, empty.

Author: I don't disagree, we need more tests. On the other hand, there is a limited number of test-cases needed for that.

### Graduation Criteria

The feature will be released as Beta and enabled by default. This is to
give a chance to disable the feature if something goes wrong, but we're

> expecting GA quality from the start, with no changes.

Reviewer 2: why not alpha and disabled by default?

Author: I think it's very confusing if we have `// +default=...` in the built-in types comments but it's not honored because the feature is alpha (and depends on an apiserver flag).

result in the same behavior, whether the type is built-in or a CRD.

In order to do that, we need to change how CRDs are defaulted, and
create a defaulting mechanism for built-in that would behave the same
way.

### CRD Normalization

Null values in CRDs are currently not defaulted. On the other hand,
`null` typically means "unspecified" in json/yaml. JSon Merge patch
interprets a "null" value for a field as a mean to delete it.

On the other hand, while `{field: null}` and `{}` probably have the same
meaning, they do not "look" the same and are hard to compare for
clients. They are also currently treated differently by Kubernetes
for defaulting purposes.

We propose the creation of a new top-level openapi flag:
`x-kubernetes-remove-nulls`. This flag will be used as a ratcheting
mechanism as we migrate to this new semantic throughout all Kubernetes
types (which would be how all types eventually work). When present and
set to true, the apiserver will use new semantics and remove all null
values from CR objects. When false or missing, the existing and
deprecated semantics will be kept. Alternatively, this flag could be set

> as a field of the CRD since this process will only apply to CRDs.

Reviewer 3: This mechanism is quite similar to [pruning](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/06/20/crd-structural-schema/#pruning-don-t-preserve-unknown-fields) which was used for ratcheting as well. Since pruning is enabled by the `preserveUnknownFields` CRD field, I'm currently in favor of adding a similar flag for null removal, for consistency. E.g. `preserveNullValues`, with a plan to eventually make it default to false like was done for `preserveUnknownFields` when CRDs went to v1. cc @sttts

Author: Also, I suspect we would run the pruning of null at the exact same time and location in code, since we already have mechanisms in place to recursively descend the objects and apply these forms of normalization. That's a 5 liner there. thanks!

deprecated semantics will be kept. Alternatively, this flag could be set
as a field of the CRD since this process will only apply to CRDs.

Note that we still consider `{}` to be different from `null`, so
`{empty: {}}` is different from `{}` or from `{empty: null}` (but the
latter two are considered equal).

Note that this mechanism will also help with immutability.

### Built-in Defaulting

Because built-in types are serialized and deserialized as Go structures,
there are semantics that are imposed on us. The two main ones are:
1. We can't differentiate between null, unspecified and zero-value,
2. non-pointer structs are always present (and hence have to be
recursively defaulted), they also can't be omitEmpty'd.

The first point is solved by the removed nulls described in the previous
section (and invalid zero-values can't be present in objects), and the
second point can be solved by forcing non-pointer structs to have a `{}`
default. To address that, we're proposing that the `default` marker is
forbidden on non-pointer structs (pointer structs can behave as
expected) and the default field of the openapi is automatically set to

> `{}`. This only applies to OpenAPI generated from built-in types or from

Author: I don't think we have many of these, and I could spend some time looking at them, but on the other hand, we can keep them as they are if needed (through existing defaulting mechanisms)?

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Currently, built-in API types are written as Go structures annotated
with markers to add additional semantics. This method has inspired
controller-tools who has re-used and improved on that technique for
building CRDs. We're proposing using the `// +default` marker to
declaratively define defaults (and have kubebuilder use that as well)
since that mechanism still doesn't exist for built-in. This proposal
tries to solve that gap.

## Motivation

Having a new `// +default` marker for built-in types has several
important benefits:

- It's more convenient for types authors.
- The types and their behaviors are easier to understand since they are
described together.
- They are less error-prone, and discourage people from using anti-patterns
like "cross-field dependency defaults" (default depends on another
field), non-deterministic or complicated defaults. These patterns
might be useful in limited circumstances, but it should be easier to do
the right thing in most cases.
- Removes the inconsistency with CRDs that already support this
mechanism.

> - Solves bug where associative keys needs to either be required or

Author: W do have cross-field dependency defaults in core, but these can't be made into declarative defaults and are unrelated to the bug of non-required associative keys.

I should link to that bug for clarification, but the bug is that container port list has two keys, name and protocol, but protocol isn't required, and thus we need to know what the default value is if we want to be able to index the elements. But today we don't have any mechanism to know what this default value is since it's hidden in the defaulting code.

defaulted. Default keys will now be able to be specified in the OpenAPI
for built-in types, and SSA will be able to fill in the missing keys.

### Goals

The goal is to add a new `// +default` marker to our current built-in Go
IDL. That marker will be transformed into the OpenAPI `default` field
and then routed to defaulting functions so that defaulting can be done
declaratively. This new marker would also be introduced in kubebuilder,
and we will make the behavior equivalent between built-in types and CRDs
so that built-in types can be directly used in kubebuilder, and the
declarative defaults will be automatically carried along.

### Non-Goals

While this proposal is probably paving the way for additional OpenAPI
based validation, validation is entirely out-of-scope for this project.

This proposal also doesn't intend to remove the existing defaulting
mechanism since some defaulting still requires non-static values that
need to be computed and can't be defined declaratively. We could replace

> some defaulting that doesn't require to be done as code though.

Author: Can you elaborate on why the bug persists?

## Proposal

It is important to us that the OpenAPI definition of a type should
result in the same behavior, whether the type is built-in or a CRD.

In order to do that, we need to change how CRDs are defaulted, and
create a defaulting mechanism for built-in that would behave the same
way.

### CRD Normalization

Null values in CRDs are currently not defaulted. On the other hand,
`null` typically means "unspecified" in json/yaml. JSon Merge patch
interprets a "null" value for a field as a mean to delete it.

On the other hand, while `{field: null}` and `{}` probably have the same
meaning, they do not "look" the same and are hard to compare for
clients. They are also currently treated differently by Kubernetes and
for defaulting purposes.

We propose the creation of a new top-level openapi flag:
`x-kubernetes-remove-nulls`. This flag will be used as a ratcheting
mechanism as we migrate to this new semantic throughout all Kubernetes
types (which would be how all types eventually work). When present and

> set to true, the apiserver will use a new semantics and remove all null

Author: I think the noun has to be plural

values from CR objects. When false or missing, the existing and
deprecated semantics will be kept. Alternatively, this flag could be set
as a field of the CRD since this process will only apply to CRDs.

Note that we still consider `{}` to be different from `null`, so
`{empty: {}}` is different from `{}` or from `{empty: null}` (but the
latter two are considered equal).

Note that this mechanism will also help with immutability.

### Built-in Defaulting

Because built-in types are serialized and deserialized as Go structures,
there are semantics that are imposed to us. The two main ones are:
1. We can't differentiate between null, unspecified and zero-value,
2. non-pointer structs are always present (and hence have to be
recursively defaulted), they also can't be omitEmpty'd.

The first point is solved by the removed nulls described in the previous

> section (and invalid zero-values can't be present in objects), and the

Reviewer 5: > (and invalid zero-values can't be present in objects)

Is this a new requirement?

Author: No

Author: I'll clarify that, thanks. They are invalid so they shouldn't be specified as actual values :-)
```suggestion
section (and invalid zero-values can't be present in objects since they are invalid), and the
```

### Examples

#### Non-pointer structs

Given the following type, defined either in Kubebuilder or as a built-in type:
```golang
type Root struct {
  Entry SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      default: {}
      type: object
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
          default: default-name
        number:
          type: integer
          default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

#### Struct pointers

> Struct pointers can be have a specific default since they are distinct

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Struct pointers are allowed to have a specific default since they are distinct
```

{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

### Marker format

The marker will have the following format:
```
// +default=<any>
```
which describes the value that the server will use if the field has a
zero-value.

`<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),
representing the actual value to use by default. That is different from
the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus
that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Namely, this will allow to preserve the concise semantics that you want
for most values:

```golang
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

  // +default=bar
  String string

  // +default=[popcorn, chips]
  StringList []string
}
```
while still allowing more complex expressions:
```
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}]
```

Forcing the "one-line" subset allows us to sidestep a lot of the YAML
weirdness in syntax, but we can still just use a YAML parser to parse
the expressions if we want.

> Non-pointer structs will, in both kubebuilder and for built-in types,

Reviewer 5: will?  will what?   this is very suspenseful :)

Author: I'll fix that :-) I want to keep the audience interested hehe

Author: I think that's a leftover from the moving around I've done, I've removed the suspens. You'll never know what I was going to say there ;-)

### Test Plan

As soon as this is implemented and working, we can start removing a lot
of the existing defaulting code and replace it with this values, and we
can re-use the existing defaulting tests, make sure that the behavior
doesn't change when moving from code-based defaults to declarative
default. Also panic in specific places of the defaulters to guarantee
that the defaulting have happened before.

### Graduation Criteria

> Since this is an internal feature and can't be disabled, we're not

Reviewer 6: This is confusing bc this KEP is going to move through both beta(1.20) and stable(1.21) so it seems that some criteria for each should be specified here.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Currently, built-in API types are written as Go structures annotated
with markers to add additional semantics. This method has inspired

> controller-tools who has re-used and improved on that technique for

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
controller-tools, which has re-used and improved on that technique for
```

> building CRDs. We're proposing using the `// +default` marker to

Reviewer 7: I think it'd be good if you showed an `=` and that the argument to this marker can be a json-formatted object, not just a leaf value--that's not going to be obvious.

Author: We have some of these in the example, I'm not sure I want to introduce that in the summary?

declaratively define defaults (and have kubebuilder use that as well)
since that mechanism still doesn't exist for built-in. This proposal
tries to bridge that gap.

## Motivation

Having a new `// +default` marker for built-in types has several
important benefits:

> - It's more convenient for types authors.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- It's more convenient for type authors.
```

- The types and their behaviors are easier to understand since they are
described together.
- They are less error-prone, and discourage people from using anti-patterns
like "cross-field dependency defaults" (default depends on another
field), non-deterministic or complicated defaults. These patterns
might be useful in limited circumstances, but it should be easier to do
the right thing in most cases.

> - Removes the inconsistency with CRDs that already support this

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Removes the inconsistency with CRDs, which already support this
```

mechanism.
- Solves bug where associative keys needs to either be required or
defaulted. Default keys will now be able to be specified in the OpenAPI
for built-in types, and SSA will be able to fill in the missing keys.

### Goals

The goal is to add a new `// +default` marker to our current built-in Go
IDL. That marker will be transformed into the OpenAPI `default` field
and then routed to defaulting functions so that defaulting can be done
declaratively. This new marker would also be introduced in kubebuilder,
and we will make the behavior equivalent between built-in types and CRDs
so that built-in types can be directly used in kubebuilder, and the
declarative defaults will be automatically carried along.

### Non-Goals

While this proposal is probably paving the way for additional OpenAPI

> based validation, validation is entirely out-of-scope for this project.

Reviewer 2: no exactly sure what you have in mind.

Slightly related maybe: CRDs today validate that given default values validate according to their OpenAPI schema, checked by the server.

Author: This is referring to using validation marker for built-in types, I've tried to clarify.

This proposal also doesn't intend to remove the existing defaulting
mechanism since some defaulting still requires non-static values that
need to be computed and can't be defined declaratively. We could replace

> some defaulting that doesn't require to be done as code though.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
some defaulting that doesn't have to be done as code, though.
```

## Proposal

It is important to us that the OpenAPI definition of a type should
result in the same behavior, whether the type is built-in or a CRD.

In order to do that, we need to change how CRDs are defaulted, and

> create a defaulting mechanism for built-in that would behave the same

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
create a defaulting mechanism for built-ins that would behave the same
```

way.

### CRD Normalization

Null values in CRDs are currently not defaulted. On the other hand,
`null` typically means "Devoid of
value"(link)[https://yaml.org/type/null.html] in json/yaml, though it is
treated as different from not present ("a null value is valid and

> different from not having that key in the mapping"). JSon Merge patch

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
different from not having that key in the mapping"). JSON Merge patch
```

interprets a "null" value for a field as a means to delete it: "Null
values in the merge patch are given special meaning to indicate the
removal of existing values in the
target."(link)[https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7386.txt#:~:text=Null%20values%20in%20the%20merge]

On the other hand, while `{field: null}` and `{}` probably have the same
meaning, they do not "look" the same and are hard to compare for
clients. They are also currently treated differently by Kubernetes for
defaulting purposes.

We propose the creation of a new CRD flag: `preserveNullValues` which
will default to `true`. This flag will be used as a ratcheting mechanism
as we migrate to this new semantic throughout all Kubernetes types
(which would be how all types eventually work). When false, the
apiserver will use new semantics and remove all null values from CR
objects. When true, the existing and deprecated semantics will be kept.
That new flag is following the same logic as "preserveUnknownFields" and
the new operation will happen using the same mechanisms right after
pruning.

Note that we still consider `{}` (and 0, 0.0, "", false, []) to be

> different from `null`, so `{empty: {}}` is different from `{}` or from

Reviewer 7: "empty" is a confusing example word in this context :)

Author: it really describes its status ;-)

Reviewer 2: not in  `empty:null`. Would rather call it `foo` or something.

`{empty: null}` (but the latter two are considered equal).

> As described by @sttts on many occasions, the immutability is blocked

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
As described by @sttts on many occasions, the effort to add a notion of immutability is blocked
```

because we don't know how to distinguish between null and

> unspecified. We believe that this mechanism will be able to unblock it.

Reviewer 2: add a sentence that we require this new flag to be false in order to use (certain) `// +default`s ?

### Built-in Defaulting

Because built-in types are serialized and deserialized as Go structures,
there are semantics that are imposed on us. The two main ones are:
1. We can't differentiate between null, unspecified and zero-value,
2. non-pointer structs are always present (and hence have to be
recursively defaulted), they also can't be omitEmpty'd.

> The first point is solved by the removed nulls described in the previous

Reviewer 2: cannot follow what you want to solve. Is this about getting semantics like for native types, but in CRDs that embed native sub-structs?

Reviewer 2: How does it solve that defaults on e.g. strings do not apply to `""` today in CRDs, but usually do on native types?

Author: I agree it doesn't solve these. This will work for client-go users since omitEmpty will remove the empty string. Discussed with Jordan, people should apply without the empty value if it causes problems.

section (and invalid zero-values can't be present in objects), and the
second point can be solved by forcing non-pointer structs to have a `{}`
default. To address that, we're proposing that the `default` marker is
forbidden on non-pointer structs (pointer structs can behave as
expected) and the default field of the openapi is automatically set to
`{}`. This only applies to OpenAPI generated from built-in types or from
kubebuilder. CRDs can still have any defaulting they have for

> structures, but we strongly suggest that OpenAPI generated from Go types

Reviewer 7: Is the "generated from Go types" qualifier needed? You can do anything you want, but your life will be easier and people will be less surprised if you do it the standard way...

> should follow that semantics.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
should follow these semantics.
```

> For example:

Reviewer 7: Should this go after the other examples? It's a little weird to see the exception case before the ordinary case.

```golang
Type Root struct {
  // Defaults on non-pointer structs are FORBIDDEN:
  // +default={name: entry, number: 12}
  Entry SubLevel
}

Type SubLevel struct {
  Name string
  Number int
}
```

Computed defaults (through defaulting functions) will not be supported
as a declarative marker and will continue being supported through the
existing defaulting functions.

### Risks and Mitigations

The main risk is that we could end-up with different defaults for

> existing types which would be extremely confusing for our users.

Reviewer 7: And the mitigation is what? Testing?

Reviewer 2: +1 had the same question before. I doubt we do proper null, zero-value testing for defaults today. They just happen to work as they work due to unmarshalling.

Reviewer 2: copying @jpbetz comment from the previous thread:

> When migrating from defaulting functions to +default tags, we could mitigate with proper testing. We should test that the defaults of existing types are working as expected anyway, so making sure that testing is in place seems reasonable and sufficient. Is there anything else about this risk we need to watch out for?

Author: Mentioned that double-checking tests and gaping the lack of coverage.

## Design Details

We are proposing to modify the defaulting generator to also generate new
defaulting functions, which will use the marker to generate the default
and apply them to the fields directly if the fields are set to their
zero-value. These new defaulting functions will be called right before

> the existing defaulting functions.

Reviewer 7: That's a little unfortunate that it's two phases rather than one phase but humans can edit/override the generated functions if desired.

adding an extra-layer on top of that which makes type authors life easier.

### Examples

#### Non-pointer structs

Given the following type, defined either in Kubebuilder or as a built-in type:
```golang
type Root struct {
  Entry SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      default: {}
      type: object
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
          default: default-name
        number:
          type: integer
          default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}

> ```

Reviewer 2: missing `default('{entry: {name:"",number:0}}')`

Author: Oh very good point, I want this nuance to be very clear.

from unspecified non-pointers structs. Modifying the type from the
previous example:
```golang
type Root struct {
  // This is now a pointer, we can provide a default:
  // +default={name: pointer-name}
  Entry *SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      $ref: SubLevel
      default: {name: pointer-name}
SubLevel:
  type: object
  properties:
    name:
      type: string
      default: default-name
    number:
      type: integer
      default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

> ### Marker format

Reviewer 7: Should this go before the examples?

The marker will have the following format:
```
// +default=<any>
```
which describes the value that the server will use if the field has a
zero-value.

`<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),
representing the actual value to use by default. That is different from
the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus
that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Namely, this will allow to preserve the concise semantics that you want
for most values:

```golang
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

  // +default=bar
  String string

  // +default=[popcorn, chips]
  StringList []string
}
```
while still allowing more complex expressions:
```
// +default=[{port: 80, name: http}]
```

Forcing the "one-line" subset allows us to sidestep a lot of the YAML
weirdness in syntax, but we can still just use a YAML parser to parse

> the expressions if we want.

Reviewer 2: a detail: null is allowed in default values?

Also already mentioned above somewhere: we should only allow validating values. We will see how clever the generator and kubebuilder can be made to check that (best effort, doesn't have to be perfect). CRDs will fails to be created if the value does not validate.

some defaulting that doesn't require to be done as code though.

## Proposal

It is important to us that the OpenAPI definition of a type should
result in the same behavior, whether the type is built-in or a CRD.

In order to do that, we need to change how CRDs are defaulted, and
create a defaulting mechanism for built-in that would behave the same
way.

### CRD Normalization

Null values in CRDs are currently not defaulted. On the other hand,
`null` typically means "Devoid of
value"(link)[https://yaml.org/type/null.html] in json/yaml, though it is
treated as different from not present ("a null value is valid and
different from not having that key in the mapping"). JSon Merge patch
interprets a "null" value for a field as a means to delete it: "Null
values in the merge patch are given special meaning to indicate the
removal of existing values in the
target."(link)[https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc7386.txt#:~:text=Null%20values%20in%20the%20merge]

On the other hand, while `{field: null}` and `{}` probably have the same
meaning, they do not "look" the same and are hard to compare for
clients. They are also currently treated differently by Kubernetes for
defaulting purposes.

> We propose the creation of a new CRD flag: `preserveNullValues` which

Reviewer 4: nit, `preserveNullValues: true` here and `x-kubernetes-remove-nulls: false` later... which one?

Reviewer 4: I assume use of this is mutually exclusive with use of nullable anywhere in the object?

Author: Yeah, that's a mistake. And as soon as I started looking at the actual implementation, I noticed that "PreserveUnknownFields" is deprecated in the CRD spec. I'll update but it should match the preserve-unknown-fields which is recommended in the openapi (per version).

That new flag is following the same logic as "preserveUnknownFields" and
the new operation will happen using the same mechanisms right after
pruning.

Note that we still consider `{}` (and 0, 0.0, "", false, []) to be
different from `null`, so `{foo: {}}` is different from `{}` or from
`{foo: null}` (but the latter two are considered equal).

As described by @sttts on many occasions, the immutability is blocked
because we don't know how to distinguish between null and
unspecified. We believe that this mechanism will be able to unblock it.

### Marker format

The marker will have the following format:
```
// +default=<any>
```
which describes the value that the server will use if the field has a
zero-value.

`<any>` has to be in one-line YAML format (including its json form),
representing the actual value to use by default. That is different from
the current encoding in kubebuilder, but there seems to be consensus
that they would be able to change that to YAML too for that new marker.

Namely, this will allow to preserve the concise semantics that you want
for most values:

```golang
type Foo struct {
  // +default=32
  Integer int

>   // +default=bar

Reviewer 8: Can we spec WRT whitespace and escapes?  Can I have a value with a newline in it? Tab?  Space?

Author: https://play.golang.org/p/kxNxW48GJ7Z
```golang
package main

import (
	"encoding/json"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	var i interface{}
	err := json.Unmarshal([]byte(`{" ": "tab:\t\nspace: "}`), &i)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(i)
}
```

```golang
type Root struct {
  Entry SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      default: {}
      type: object
      properties:
        name:
          type: string
          default: default-name
        number:
          type: integer
          default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: "", number: 0}}') # empty string is different from null or unspecified
{"entry": {"name": "", "number": 0}}
```

On the other hand, this is forbidden:
```golang
Type Root struct {

>   // Defaults on non-pointer structs are FORBIDDEN:

Reviewer 8: Forbidden  or ignored?  What actually happens if someone specifies this?  Will CI fail?

Author: Forbidden. It will fail.

  Entry *SubLevel
}

type SubLevel struct {
  // +defaut=default-name
  Name string
  // +default=0
  Number int
}
```

We would generate the following OpenAPI definition, both for CRD types (by kubebuilder)
and built-in types:
```yaml
Root:
  type: object
  default: {}
  properties:
    entry:
      $ref: SubLevel
      default: {name: pointer-name}
SubLevel:
  type: object
  properties:
    name:
      type: string
      default: default-name
    number:
      type: integer
      default: 0
```

which would have the following behavior, both for CRD types and built-in types:
```python
>>> default('null')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: null}')
{"entry": {"name": "pointer-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {}}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

#### Non-pointer fields

Non-pointer fields are also important, since they have a specific unmarshalling mechanism in Go.

For CRDs, we can assume that invalid zero-values are omitted, otherwise

> the objects would technically be invalid.

Author: No, this is saying that we don't care about the defaulting of values that are not accepted.

For built-ins, we can differentiate two cases:
1. The zero-value for the field is invalid (e.g. if empty string is not a valid value)
2. The zero-value is valid, but is also the default (e.g. enabled false by default).

Both these cases will be handled properly, here's an example:
```golang
type Object struct {
     // This field has an invalid zero-value, empty string is not a
     // valid string.
     // +default=default-name
     Name string

     // This field is defaulted to 0 with no defaulter.
     // +default=0
     Defaulted int
}
```

This would generate the following OpenAPI:
```yaml
Object:
  type: object
  properties:
    invalid:
      type: string

>       default: default-name

Reviewer 2: why invalid zero value? Where is it a) in the type above and b) here in OpenAPI.

Reviewer 2: With this OpenAPI spec `""` is a completely valid value.

    defaulted:

>       type: boolean

Reviewer 2: it's an int above, not a bool.

      default: false
```

Which, for both CRD types and built-in types, would generate the following behavior:
```python
>>> default('{}')
{"entry": {"name": "default-name", "number": 0}}
>>> default('{entry: {name: other-name}}')
{"entry": {"name": "other-name", "number": 0}}
```

Note that the generated code for built-in will look like this:
```golang
func GenerateDefault(obj *Object) {
     if obj.Name == "" {
          obj.Name = "default-name"
     }

>      if obj.Number == 0 {

Reviewer 8: we should be able to elide this and replace it with a comment

          obj.Number = 0
     }
}
```

### Risks and Mitigations

The main risk is that we could end-up with different defaults for
existing types which would be extremely confusing for our users. This
can be mitigated by double-checking the existing tests and adding new

> tests for gap in coverage.

Author: That seems orthogonal. We haven't ever generated defaulting tests before. Ideally we test the `+default` mechanism extensively rather than testing how resources actually get defaulted.

## Design Details

We are proposing to modify the defaulting generator to also generate new
defaulting functions, which will use the marker to generate the default
and apply them to the fields directly if the fields are set to their
zero-value. These new defaulting functions will be called, inside the
existing defaulting logic, right before the existing defaulting

> functions. The defaulting call will stay unchanged.

Author: So the text reads before, but I agree that it could change the complex manual defaulting behavior. Since it's more complex and manual, it's harder to reason about the creative things people could have done :-). Running the declarative defaults AFTER might make things easier to understand?

> functions. The defaulting call will stay unchanged.

Reviewer 4: running after would give me more confidence that we weren't breaking things

the OpenAPI definition.
3. Implement the new CRD semantics that clears `null` values from
objects when the `x-kubernetes-remove-nulls` flag is present and true at
the top-level (or in the CRD).
4. Add additional "default" field to sigs.k8s.io/structured-merge-diff
internal schema, and parse that field from the OpenAPI, use it when the
map key is missing. The code for this already exists in a
[PR](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/structured-merge-diff/pull/83#issuecomment-498410353)
5. Update some of the existing built-in APIs to specify their default
when they are strictly declarative, probably focusing first on defaults
that are part of the associative keys (e.g. `protocol: TCP`).

Note that this is not changing how built-in defaults work, but is merely
adding an extra-layer on top of that which makes type authors life easier.

### Test Plan

As soon as this is implemented and working, we can start removing a lot
of the existing defaulting code and replace it with this values, and we
can re-use the existing defaulting tests, make sure that the behavior
doesn't change when moving from code-based defaults to declarative

> default. Also panic in specific places of the defaulters to guarantee

Author: Thanks, I'll clarify, that's probably meant as a one time thing.

that the defaulting have happened before.

### Graduation Criteria

> As an internal feature, this will go straight to stable.

Reviewer 8: I think the graduation criteria should be that all eligible manually-written default functions are converted to this mechanism and the manual code deleted.  That would leave only "weird" cases in */defaults.go.

Reviewer 9: if dynamic defaulting leaks into user manually-written defaults, it might be a bit more complex to replicate this in static markers. @apelisse did you discuss this case in the KEP / comments; i may have missed it?

```
func myDefaultingFunc(obj *SomeObject) {
	if obj.foo == 0 {
		obj.foo = 2
	}
	obj.bar = obj.foo - 1
}
```

Author: Right, that's why the "declarative" marker defaults will be applied after custom defaulting logic.

In your example, if there is a declarative marker for `foo` or `bar`, neither will be applied since they both have 2 and (that defaulting function is weird since `bar` is always set ;-) 1 respectively.

Author: Also, clearly, declarative markers won't be able to have this kind of logic, that's on purpose, more often than not, you're doing something wrong.

Reviewer 9: > Right, that's why the "declarative" marker defaults will be applied after custom defaulting logic.

interesting, i would have expected the dynamic defaulting to apply after the static defaulting from markers.

> In your example, if there is a declarative marker for foo or bar, neither will be applied since they both have 2 and (that defaulting function is weird since bar is always set ;-) 1 set respectively.

i guess, i've tried to showcase that `bar`'s defaulting may solely depend on the value of `foo`.

Author: > interesting, i would have expected the dynamic (custom) defaulting to apply after the static defaulting from markers.

I haven't been able to think of an example where it would be better one way or another, but this is possibly simpler to reason about. What's left unspecified after the custom function will have the declarative value applied.

> i guess, i've tried to showcase that bar's defaulting may solely depend on the value of foo.

Yes, that's what I understood. But we're specifically not allowing this kind of cross-field defaulting

Reviewer 9: > Also, clearly, declarative markers won't be able to have this kind of logic, that's on purpose, more often than not, you're doing something wrong if you need this.

hm, if so, there has to be a way to alert authors of new APIs about similar bad practices (if considered bad practices).

Author: Good point, I think we should.
